let's talk about consistent hashing
including the problem it solves how it
works and when it might come up in a
system design
interview now consistent hashing is
easiest learned via an example so
imagine we host a simple events website
something like Ticket Master it starts
really small so we only need a single
server and a single database that stores
all of our event information now as the
site becomes more popular we have way
too many events to store on that single
database so we add two additional
databases but there's a problem for each
given event how do we know which
database that event should be stored in
is it stored in one 2 or three we
certainly don't want to have to query
all three databases every time a client
requests some information for a given
event simply because we don't know which
database it's actually stored in one
approach as shown here is to Hash the
event ID with some hash function this
can be an md5 murmur whatever it may be
and this will give us some large number
we can then take that large number and
mod it by the number of database servers
that we have in this case three that
will return a number between 1 and three
indicating which database that event
should live on and so in our case event
1 2 3 4 when hashed is 67211 mod 3 equal
2 and so it should be stored on database
2 this hash with modulo approach worked
great to start but the site continued to
grow and when we went to add a fourth
database We R ran into a really big
problem see by changing the number of
database servers that we had we've also
now changed the modulo in the function
it's gone from Mod 3 to mod 4 the issue
with this is that this means almost all
data now needs to be redistributed not
just data that should be in our new
database for this example makes that
really clear so if you remember before
event 1 2 3 4 existed on database 2
because we had this function where we
modded by three now if we instead run
this by uh with the new setup modding by
four now it should exist on database 3
and so that means event 1 2 3 4 would
need to be move from database 2 to
database 3 and 1 12 3 4 isn't alone it's
not an isolated incident almost every
single event in our database needs to be
moved or redistributed the this
redistribution is really bad it creates
a surge in database activity and this
can slow down or in some cases even
crash our site the problem didn't stop
there either
let's say that we needed to decommission
database 3 maybe it was getting old so
we would need to move the data from
database 3 over to both one and two
respectively but since our modulo has
changed again we've not only
redistributed all of the data from
database 3 but we also redistributed all
of the data once more and so looking
back at our example uh event 1 2 3 4
which was on database 2 in theory
shouldn't need to move but now it's
moved to database 1
okay so now that we understand the
problem let's go ahead and introduce the
solution consistent hashing and so
consistent hashing uh consists of three
steps the first step is that we create
what's called a hash ring that has a
fixed number of points and so to keep it
simple we've Illustrated here just 0 to
100 now in reality this is 0 to 2 32
basically the full integer space uh but
the concept is entirely the same so
we'll stick with 0 to 100 now we then
evenly distrib our databases across this
hash ring so in our case we have four
databases we could Point them at 1 25 50
and 75
respectively and now in order to know
which database a particular event should
be stored on we first hash the ID just
like we did before imagine that event
number two hashed is 16 we then find
that point on our ring 16 is here and we
walk clockwise until we hit a database
so in this case we hit database 2 and
we're going to store event two on
database number two now this might seem
obvious but this ring isn't physical of
course it's just the mathematical
construct that's programmed into your
code um but let's take a look at how
this solved our problems from earlier
and so if we want to go ahead and add
our fifth database like we did before
look at what happens let's say we add
that database and we put it at 0 90 on
the ring we could put it anywhere but
we'll say 90 now the only events that
need to be distributed are any events
that hashed to the range 75 and 90 these
are events that were previously on
database 1 and they now need to be on
database 5 but all other events stay
exactly where they were there's no
longer this Mass
redistribution now the exact same thing
is true when we try to remove a database
as well and so in this case we can
remove database 2 and only events that
hash to uh a spot on the ring between 0
and 2 5 like event 2 which hashed to 16
before need to be moved they were
previously on database 2 and now they
need to be moved over to database
3 Okay so we've solved for most of our
problems up until this point but there's
one last thing to take care of and so
ideally if we remov database 2 we
wouldn't store all of the data from
database 2 on database 3 as we're doing
now this means that database 3 has 2x
the amount of data as database 1 and
database 4 so the question becomes how
do we make sure that the data is more
evenly distributed when a database exits
the ring and the solution is something
called virtual nodes and so instead of
putting each database at just one point
on the ring we can put it at multiple
points and so for example if you take
database 1 we don't only put it at
position zero we can also put it at
position 20 and 40 and 60 and 80 for
database 2 we don't only put it at 25 we
can also put it at 5 and 45 65 and 85
and so on for each of the other
databases and so what this means is that
now if database 2 is removed instead of
all the data all the events that hashed
to this point on the ring going to
database 3 some of them are going to go
to database 3 those between 0 and 10 but
between 10 and 15 they're going to go to
database 4 and between 15 and 20 they'll
go to database 1 and 20 to 25 will end
up falling on database 3 and so as you
can see it ends up being a much more
even
redistribution so now you know what
consistent hashing is but when does it
come up in a system design interview the
reality is most of your favorite
services use it behind the scenes to
scale each of redus Cassandra datam modb
uh most CDN and many more all use
consistent hashing now in an interview
you might make a nod to this when you
introduce any of these Technologies but
the only time you're really going to
need to go deep into describing the
algorithm is if you're designing a
single scaled backend component
something like design and distributed
cache design and distributed database uh
design and distributed message CU or so
on uh lastly if you really like this
video and you want more free content to
help you prepare for your software
engineering interviews head over to
hello interview.com we have everything
you need over there good luck with your
interviews bye-bye